# PART I. HOW THE WAR BEGAN

## CHAPTER 1. Was It a Surprise?

Officially the outbreak of the Korean War was described as a surprise. The White Paper issued by the American State Department spoke of it as a “surprise attack.”1 The United Nations Commission on Korea reported that the South Korean forces “were taken completely by surprise as they had no reason to believe from intelligence sources that invasion was imminent.” General Douglas MacArthur’s biographer, John Gunther, wrote that “the South Koreans and Americans in Korea, to say nothing of SCAP [MacArthur Headquarters] in Tokyo, were taken utterly by surprise.”

If this is true, certain first reactions in Washington to the outbreak of war in Korea remain unexplained. The attack came on a Sunday, and at once recalled that other Sunday, nine years earlier, when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. The parallel was striking, but inquiry revealed a difference. The first indications were that the attack in Korea was not a surprise at all. This difference between Pearl Harbor and Korea was skeptically greeted, grudgingly accepted, and then quickly forgotten—as Freud tells us people conveniently forget inconvenient facts.

When newspapermen that torrid Washington summer day called at the Pentagon, huge headquarters of the United States Department of Defense, “an aide said privately that the United States expected the attack.” This officer pointed to “the fact that ships were ready to evacuate the families of American officers and others in South Korea as evidence that the invasion was not a surprise.”

When newspapermen tried to confirm this, they succeeded in reaching America’s highest ranking intelligence officer, Rear Admiral Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, which coordinates and distributes information received from all the various American intelligence services. Admiral Hillenkoetter did not insist, as Washington officials so often do, on speaking only “off the record” or “without attribution.” He permitted his name to be used, and he made the statement that American intelligence was aware that “conditions existed in Korea that could have meant an invasion this week or next.”

The press did not take this statement too seriously. America’s most authoritative newspaper, the New York Times, treated it as of subordinate importance. The Admiral’s response may well have seemed the natural reaction of an official trying to cover up a blunder by pretending he-knew-it-all-the-time. The New York Times account next morning stressed the likelihood that the Republicans would make the sudden outbreak of war “a national issue, involving as it does the country’s foreign intelligence.”

The next day the Admiral was summoned to appear before a private hearing of the Senate Appropriations Committee. He was called on motion of Senator Bridges of New Hampshire, one of the fiercest critics of the Truman Administration’s Far Eastern policies. With Senator Bridges on that Committee was Senator Knowland of California, another Republican critic of “appeasement” in the Pacific. Senator Knowland had already issued a statement saying that the invasion had “caught the Administration flatfooted.” The Republicans had made a major issue of Pearl Harbor, and were looking forward to a repeat performance.

The Admiral was asked to appear at 3 P.M. but, when a more urgent summons came for the Admiral from the White House, the hearing was postponed until an hour later. For the Admiral, it must have been a trying day. He had to convince the Republicans that American intelligence had not been taken unawares, yet he had to do so without raising too many questions about the Administration’s failure to take preventive action on the basis of his reports. Perhaps he also had to explain to the President why he had not called attention more forcibly to those intelligence reports.

The statement the Admiral made on leaving the White House may have reflected the version of events he had just offered the President. The Admiral “said the North Korean forces have had the capability of invading the South for a year, but that it had been impossible to predict the timetable under which they would march, if at all.” This was quite different from his statement the day before that indications showed an attack was possible “this week or next.” To say that American intelligence had known for a year that the North could invade the South but didn’t know when they would invade, if at all, was the same as admitting that American intelligence had been taken by surprise.

This did indeed remain the version at MacArthur’s headquarters in Tokyo. John Gunther, in his biography of MacArthur, writes: “On the morning of June 25, the North Koreans launched an attack by no fewer than four divisions, assisted by three constabulary brigades; 70,000 men were committed, and about 70 tanks went into action simultaneously at four different points, … Ask any military man what all this means. To assemble such a force, arm and equip it, and have it ready to wheel into precalculated action over a wide front with perfect synchronization, on the appointed date, must have taken at least a month, … Yet South Koreans and Americans in Korea, to say nothing of SCAP in Tokyo, were taken utterly by surprise.… It was more disgraceful than Pearl Harbor. Our eyes were shut, and even our feet were sound asleep.”

Gunther adds, “No doubt this will all be investigated in good time.” It was investigated that very first day after the war began when Admiral Hillenkoetter was summoned before the Senate Committee. But when the Senators emerged from behind the closed doors of the hearing room they were mollified. The Admiral’s account at the hearing was quite different from the vague statement he made on leaving the White House. He had gone into considerable detail before the Committee, producing a file of intelligence bulletins to prove that he had not been taken unawares. The latest of these was dated June 20, only five days before the outbreak of the war. Senators Bridges and Knowland told newspapermen waiting outside the hearing room that they were now satisfied that the Central Intelligence Agency had been “doing a good job.”

It would be strange if, in a country like Korea, American intelligence were to overlook a military buildup as impressive as that which went into action on the 38th Parallel that Sunday morning. Korea was one place where American intelligence was not dependent on meager hints from dubious agents in country difficult to penetrate. There were 500 American officers and 700 civilian technicians in South Korea. They were scattered throughout the government and the armed forces. The government itself was dependent on American aid and eager to be cooperative. Nowhere was the Iron Curtain less formidable than on the 38th Parallel. The same people lived, the same language was spoken, on both sides of that artificial boundary. Much of the frontier ran through rugged country difficult to patrol and easy to penetrate. It is hard to believe that an invasion force could be built up on that border without detection.

The bulletins the Admiral showed the Senators that day were not made public, but America’s leading military commentator, Hanson Baldwin of the New York Times, a trusted confidant at the Pentagon, reported that they showed “a marked buildup by the North Korean People’s Army along the 38th Parallel beginning in the early days of June.”

Major elements of four North Korean divisions, Baldwin wrote, plus two other units described as constabulary brigades, were in position along that border “where intermittent fighting and border raids were a part of life.” Commencing in early June, intelligence reported that “light and medium tanks probably of Japanese manufacture, about thirty 122-mm. Soviettype field guns and other heavy equipment were assembled at the front, and troop concentrations became noticeable.”

If there really were advance warnings, why had nothing been done about them? The question created disbelief. That very first day of the war, when the New York Times reported that the Pentagon and the Admiral claimed that they had not been surprised, it quoted other unnamed “observers” as being skeptical of these assertions. These “observers” suggested that if the United States had known that troops were massing on the Korean border for a possible invasion it would have made diplomatic representations “either to the United Nations, to the North Korean government or to Russia.” They also pointed out that warning could have been given in a less official way by making some of this intelligence information available to the press. The “observers” were mystified by “the failure of any news reports to tell that such a crisis was brewing along the 38th Parallel.”

This also puzzled the Senators at the Hillenkoetter hearing. When questioned by them, the Admiral “could offer no explanation why the receiving agencies had apparently failed to interpret the indications he furnished as evidence of a move to be undertaken soon.” One Senator said he would “make it his business to find out.” If he ever did, he kept what he learned to himself.

The mystery is why Washington should have been surprised, when there was reason to believe from intelligence reports that an attack might be in preparation. Admiral Hillenkoetter told the Committee that the duties of his agency “did not, in his view, include evaluation of the information it passed on.” This bit of information turned up two months later, in August, in the story announcing his replacement as chief of intelligence.

If it was not Admiral Hillenkoetter’s job to evaluate this information—to say, “Look, this might mean an attack is coming”—then whose job was it? Primarily, one supposes, the Department of Defense. But the Pentagon is a big place, and its military responsibilities covered a wide area, from occupied Germany in the West to occupied Japan in the East. If war broke out in Korea, at the very threshold of occupied Japan, threatening the peace of the Pacific, the task of coping with the military consequences would rest with MacArthur in Tokyo.

If MacArthur Headquarters in Tokyo evaluated this intelligence as important, that evaluation would have alerted Washington. If MacArthur Headquarters brushed it off as unreliable or unimportant, no subordinate official in Washington would dare insist that it might mean war. And, if Washington disagreed with MacArthur’s evaluation, he was not one to keep his light hidden under a bushel. Every publicity device from well-timed unofficial “leaks” to full-dress interviews was constantly being utilized by MacArthur Headquarters to get its point of view across.

Korea was not occupied territory—but neither was Formosa, yet for months the danger of a Red attack on Formosa had been a constant theme at Tokyo Headquarters. Headlines like “REDS MASS FOR WAR ON 38TH PARALLEL” would have been easy to evoke in the American press. It was not necessary to wait for the capture of a North Korean timetable. The mere possibility would have been enough. The absence of inspired press reports out of Tokyo warning of possible Communist aggression in Korea was all the more puzzling because it was so out of keeping with MacArthur’s character and usual mode of operation.

1All references are placed together following the text, on pages 349-359. Citations are given for the sources of all quotations, with the exception of those which are clearly identified in the text by name and date of publication.
