## CHAPTER 3. Connally’s Warning
MacArthur relished the role of big brother to little Syngman Rhee. True, MacArthur took the Japanese side in disputes between South Korea and Japan over reparations and the rankling compulsory registration imposed on all Koreans living in Japan. But MacArthur had shown himself protective in all that concerned South Korea’s relations with its Communist neighbors. At the Seoul ceremonies which established the Rhee regime in August, 1948, MacArthur had proclaimed: “In this hour, as the fortunes of righteousness advance, the triumph is dulled by one of the great tragedies of contemporary history—an artificial barrier has divided your land. This barrier must and will be torn down.” It is difficult to believe that Rhee did not turn to MacArthur for aid and advice when he began to fear that this barrier might be torn down from the wrong side.

In 1949, when Rhee went to Tokyo for a brief visit, MacArthur saw him off—as the cables reported—with a pat on the back and a declaration: “You can depend upon it that I will defend South Korea as I would defend the shores of my own native land.” Could it be that Rhee did not let MacArthur know of the threatening preparations on the 38th Parallel? John Gunther explains that the General had no “political or military responsibility” for Korea after the occupation ended on August 15, 1948. “It is only fair to state this with emphasis,” Gunther writes, “inasmuch as several of his critics have sought to lay to his door some responsibility for our negligent intelligence. The General was not to blame. Korea was not part of his domain.” On the other hand, Gunther adds, as commander in chief of the Far East Command, MacArthur “might well have given developments in Korea a more penetrating scrutiny than he did.”

Gunther’s account reflects an almost exuberant eagerness on the part of Tokyo Headquarters to admit what seems an extraordinary bit of stupidity. “The South Koreans and Americans in Korea, to say nothing of SCAP in Tokyo,” he relates, “were as blankly astonished as if the sun had suddenly gone out. The North Koreans achieved complete tactical and even strategic surprise.” This was certainly not true of the South Koreans. Could it have been true of Tokyo Headquarters? Could MacArthur have overlooked the warlike preparations noted in the Central Intelligence bulletins in Washington? More extraordinary than the oversight itself is MacArthur’s readiness to admit it. This is what seems so out of character, in a commander who would normally tend to cover up the slightest retreat or the most excusable defeat in high-sounding circumlocutions.

What adds to the difficulty of believing that MacArthur was quite that unaware is the visit paid to Korea at the time by John Foster Dulles, Republican adviser to the United States Secretary of State. Dulles spent three days in Korea and then several days in Tokyo with MacArthur the week before the war began. On his way home, three days after the fighting started, Dulles stopped at Honolulu, where he said he had known the situation was “critical” when he was in Korea but that the attack from the North “came sooner than expected.” No one asked him when he expected the attack, or whether he had mentioned the possibility to MacArthur.

When Dulles left Washington on June 14, he said he was going to Korea “on the invitation of the President of the Korean Republic.” Surely Syngman Rhee must have spoken to Dulles about the invasion he feared and about the inadequacy of the South Korean military equipment? Dulles was in a sense the godfather of the South Korean Republic. “In 1947, and again in 1948,” as he said in that same statement on leaving Washington, “I had the responsibility in the United Nations General Assembly of representing the United States in the sponsorship of the resolution which led to the reestablishment of Korea’s independence under a representative government administering the free part of Korea.” He might have added that the South Korean Republic was also the first fruit of another institution he had successfully sponsored at the UN—the Interim Committee or “Little Assembly,” a device for circumventing the Soviet veto power on the Security Council. It was the Interim Committee which, despite the serious misgivings of Canada and Australia, voted to authorize the separate elections in South Korea that led to the establishment of the Republic. For Dulles, Korea was a symbol. As acting chief United States delegate to the General Assembly during the debate on Korea he had “made it clear that the United Nations action on Korea was to be taken as an endorsement of the wider opposition of American foreign policy to Communism.”

It is this record which makes it so hard to understand why Dulles did not seek by some public statement to focus American and world attention on the danger which menaced the South Korean Republic. Dulles left Washington June 14. We know from Hanson Baldwin’s account in the New York Times that the marked buildup of armed force on the 38th Parallel in what might well be preparation for an attack “was described in a [intelligence] report of June 9 and substantiated on June 13.” These intelligence bulletins, as Admiral Hillenkoetter had explained to the inquiring Senators, were distributed to those persons in the government authorized to see them. Were they made available to Dulles in preparation for his trip? He was chief Republican adviser to the Secretary of State. He had played the leading American role in the creation of South Korea. He was going to the Far East at the request of the President and the Secretary of State to study the question of a Japanese peace treaty. The outbreak of war in Korea would at once affect the political and military calculations determining America’s Japanese policy.

Dulles stayed three days with his Korean hosts and protégés, and spent one of these days inspecting their defenses on the 38th Parallel. Could it be that they did not discuss their fears, military needs, and intelligence with him? If so, what made him think while he was there that the situation was “critical,” but that the attack (as he said in Honolulu) had come sooner than he thought it would?

Dulles addressed the Korean National Assembly on June 19. The speech, while fervid, was confined to cold-war generalities, but it implied aid in resisting Communist aggression. He told the Assembly that the Korean people were “today … in the front line of freedom, under conditions that are both dangerous and exciting … you encounter a new menace, that of Soviet Communism … [which] has seized in its cruel embrace the Korean people to the north of the 38th Parallel and … seeks by terrorism, fraudulent propaganda, infiltration and incitement to civil unrest, to enfeeble and discredit your new Republic.” He assured them, “You are not alone … so long as you continue to play worthily your part in the great design of human freedom.”

The South Korean officials must have been eager to learn in private talks with Dulles whether these were mere words, or whether they could count on concrete aid if war broke out. That aid would have to come first of all from Japan. It is asking a great deal to believe that Rhee, fearing an impending attack, did not ask Dulles to take the matter up with General MacArthur in Tokyo.

We do not know what Dulles discussed with Rhee in Seoul or afterward in Tokyo with MacArthur, but Rhee’s urgent problem was part of a larger problem in which MacArthur had shown an intense interest for months: the problem of whether the Truman Administration could be brought to commit itself to military support of the remaining anti-Communist regimes in the Far East.

For Rhee the problem had two aspects, one internal, the other external, and it is in the light of both that the generalities in Dulles’ speech at Seoul must be examined. This was the internal problem: the Korean National Assembly that Dulles addressed on June 19, six days before war began, was the first meeting of a new assembly, the fruit of elections Rhee had tried hard to avoid. By decree, on March 31, he had ordered these elections postponed until November on the excuse that more time was needed to complete the budget. Eight days later he rescinded the decree, after receiving a sharp warning from Secretary of State Acheson on April 7 that South Korea would lose United States aid unless the elections were held as originally scheduled on May 30, and inflationary practices curbed. The elections, the first free elections in Korean history, brought out ninety percent of the voters and proved disastrous for Rhee. The opposition centered its campaign on the brutal police practices of the Rhee regime and only 27 members of the old assembly that Rhee had dominated were reelected. At least 128 of the 210 seats were won by independents, and Rhee supporters were sure of only 45 seats.

The North had begun a campaign for unification, and urged the South to throw Rhee and his cabinet out as traitors. Rhee had one major weapon to utilize against peaceful unification. The Korean Aid Bill passed by Congress in February of 1950 carried the proviso that aid would be terminated “in the event of the formation in the Republic of Korea of a coalition government which includes one or more members of the Communist Party or of the party now in control of the government of North Korea.” It is in the light of this provision that one must read Rhee’s statement to the Assembly on June 19: “We refuse to compromise with or make any concessions to the Communists. That would be the road leading toward disaster.” It would also be the road leading to loss of American aid. But what if, with peaceful unification blocked by Congressional policy, there should be an internal revolt in the South, or an attack by the North, or both? Would there be aid from the United States? And how much?

The Korean situation was becoming a smaller version of the Chinese situation, and it displayed official American policy in the same baffling inconsistencies. Dean Acheson, by insisting on free elections, had created a crisis for the Rhee regime. But Congress, by its proviso on aid, was preventing that crisis from being resolved peacefully, in conformity with majority aspirations for peaceful unification—on both sides of the Parallel. Would Rhee be driven out of South Korea as Chiang had been driven off the mainland of China? This was hardly a question to which MacArthur could remain indifferent. And now Senator Connally, in saying that the Reds would overrun Korea when they got ready just as they “will probably overrun Formosa,” touched a sore point at MacArthur Headquarters which was itself enough to draw MacArthur’s attention forcibly to Korea. The Formosan question had been for months the center of a running battle between the Truman Administration and its headstrong military occupation chief in Tokyo.

The question of Formosa indeed was not without bearing on how Dulles happened to become chief Republican adviser to the Secretary of State in the spring of 1950. He had created some ill-feeling at the White House during his unsuccessful campaign for the Senate in 1949 by attacking Truman’s Fair Deal as “a clear … danger to human liberty.” Dulles’ attempt to link his Democratic rival, former Governor Herbert H. Lehman, with Communists and Communism also left a bitter aftertaste with Truman. And yet Dulles owed to Truman his appointment year after year as a member of the various American delegations to the meetings of the United Nations General Assembly and the Council of Four Power Foreign Ministers.

It was Formosa, in a sense, which returned Dulles to favor again. In December, 1949, Chiang Kai-shek, facing the threat of a Communist invasion of his last stronghold, Formosa, was imploring Washington for military aid. In Washington Chiang’s representatives utilized their powerful connections with the Republican party. On January 2, former President Herbert Hoover and Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio demanded that the United States Navy be used to prevent a “Communist invasion” of Formosa. The next day, like a well-planned bombshell, the United Press revealed the contents of a private circular the State Department had sent out to American diplomats abroad on December 23 saying that Formosa’s fall to the Chinese Communists was to be expected and that the United States would not interfere. The next day Secretary of State Dean Acheson was summoned to explain by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee at a hearing set for January 10. Truman’s hand was thus forced, and on January 5 he told his press conference in a written statement that the United States would not give “military aid or advice” to Chiang on Formosa and would not “pursue a course which would lead to involvement in the civil conflicts in China.” This statement of nonintervention in Chinese internal affairs remained the official American policy for not quite seven months. It was reversed by the outbreak of war in Korea.

Where did the United Press obtain the document which put Truman on the spot? In Tokyo. General MacArthur ordered an investigation on the 6th, the day after Truman’s statement, but nobody in Tokyo seems to have done anything about finding out how the United Press got that scoop from its correspondent at MacArthur Headquarters in Tokyo. An investigation did soon begin to make headlines, but not the investigation of that curious “leak” in Tokyo. It was the investigation precipitated in Washington by Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin, who delighted Chiang’s friends at the capital by attacking the State Department as “Red,” with special emphasis on those who had helped to establish America’s skeptical attitude toward Chiang Kai-shek. When the heat became intense, the Department sought to bring Dulles back as Republican adviser, hoping that he might win it some Republican support and give it some protective coloration. The White House reluctantly named Dulles on April 6. His first assignment was preparation of the Japanese peace treaty.

If Truman had misgivings about the Dulles appointment, they soon proved well founded. In the Far East, Dulles turned up in MacArthur’s “corner.” He made a speech in Tokyo saying, “Our material might was exemplified by the atomic bomb; our moral might is exemplified by General MacArthur.” The flattery might have been forgiven, if put to the Administration’s purposes. But the day after laying it on—and with a shovel, as Disraeli advised with royalty—Dulles discreetly but unmistakably joined forces with MacArthur onFormosa policy. Fresh from a ninety-minute talk with MacArthur, Dulles told a press conference that his own presence in the Far East “indicated that the principle of bipartisan foreign policy now might be extended for the first time to Asia.” When “questioned specifically regarding Formosa” at that Tokyo press conference, he said America’s foreign policies “are constantly under review, taking account of changing situations. This generality applies to Formosa also.” The “changing situations” which did reverse the Formosa policy that very next week were those created by the outbreak of war in Korea.

It is against this background that the silence of both Dulles and MacArthur on Korea is so tantalizing. Here were two men who had demonstrated consummate skill in politics and in the creation of public opinion, both anxious to commit the United States more strongly against Communism in the Far East. At a time when there was reason to believe North Korea might be preparing an aggression against South Korea, neither uttered a word of warning. Is it possible that the outbreak of war in Korea was preceded and followed by a chain of errors, falsehoods, forgeries, and negligences so extraordinary as to leave MacArthur unaware of what was going on? It would be easier to believe, in the light of what happened afterward—when the Korean War reversed American policy not only on Korea but also on Formosa—that MacArthur preferred to “play dumb,” that Korea was a pawn to be sacrificed in a bigger game, a gambit offered as in chess, and that he did not want to do or say anything which might put his opponents on guard.

This is only surmise. Much that is otherwise inexplicable would fall into orderly place in the chain of events if it were true. Whether the outbreak of the war in Korea, like the assassination at Sarajevo which unleashed World War I, had its own unsavory secret history no outsider yet knows. But there was at least one well-informed American at the time who did not think impossible the kind of tactics this would imply. This man was Senator Connally.

There was a warning against the “preventive war” mentality in the U.S. News and World Report interview with Senator Connally. The interview dealt with the prospects of peace and focused, as might be expected in the existing American atmosphere, on the intentions of Russia. The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee didn’t think Russia wanted war. He didn’t think Russia needed war: “They got along after World War I,” he said, “without a war.” He didn’t consider war between the United States and the USSR inevitable. “They might change their policy,” the Senator said, “we might change our policy so that there wouldn’t be any cause for a war.”

The interviewer asked whether the widespread view in America that war was inevitable wasn’t based “largely on the fear that some incident might … inflame the parties into war.” The Senator didn’t look at it quite that way; he seemed to think some people were actually looking for an incident. “Well,” was his reply, given verbatim in this full-dress question-and-answer interview, “a lot of them believe like this: They believe that events will transpire which will maneuver around and present an incident which will make us fight. That’s what a lot of them are saying: ‘We’ve got to battle some time, why not now?’” Was some such “maneuvering around”—to create an incident—the key to events in Korea?