# Preface

**by Bruce Cumings**

Americans know the Korean War as a “forgotten war,” which is another way of saying that generally they do not know it. A war that killed upwards of four million people, 35,000 of them Americans, is remembered mainly as an odd conflict sandwiched between the good war (World War II) and the bad war (Vietnam). Today most people will find it difficult to connect this war with a modernized South Korea, host to the 1988 Olympics and exporter of family cars and computers.

If people do know the Korean War, they usually know the official story. This presents the war as a simple sequence: in June 1950 the North Koreans, at Stalin’s order, suddenly attacked an innocent and defenseless Republic of Korea; the Truman administration responded by invoking the collective security procedures of the United Nations in a “police action” designed to restore the status quo ante, the thirty-eighth parallel that divided North and South. General Douglas MacArthur accomplished that task by the end of September, after a brilliant amphibious landing at the port of Inch’on. Thereafter things went awry, as MacArthur sought to unify Korea through a march into the North, soon bringing Chinese “hordes” into the fighting; Truman attempted to limit the war and ultimately was forced to dismiss his recalcitrant field commander in April 1951. Ceasefire talks soon began, but seemingly minor issues, like prisoner-of-war exchanges, kept the war going until July 1953. It ended in a stalemate that left Korea divided into two states, as it had been before the war began.

Almost four decades ago, I. F. Stone challenged the official story with a book that opened and closed on a note of mystery, an inquiry into what Tacitus called arcana imperii—empire and its method as a “hidden thing,” shrouded above all from the people it ruled.1 Stone described a war in which “an ephemeral elective occupant” at home (Truman) jousted with an “ambitious proconsular Caesar abroad” (MacArthur), “already plotting to turn against the capital the armies with which he had been supplied to hold distant marches against barbarian hordes.” Out of print for almost two decades, The Hidden History of the Korean War now seems to be a book with nine lives, padding back in again on the cat’s feet of its shrewd author, to unsettle the scribes of historical and political orthodoxy.

Stone at first accepted the official story, believing as so many others did that the Korean War was a clear example of unprovoked aggression, which must have had Moscow’s sponsorship. But in Paris in the winter of 1950–51, he began to wonder. His new vantage point enabled him to see America as a foreigner would. The late Theodore White once said that “Pekingology” is like watching two great whales do battle beneath the ocean; occasionally they surface and spout a bit, which is your only evidence of what the trouble might be in China. But American politics, too, is often like this: we need to do “Washingtonology”—read newspapers carefully, watch the rise and fall of key figures, look for power struggles. Stone followed this method.

Yet to say these things runs deeply against the grain of American thought, violating our conceptions of politics, of history, of human action and conjuring up conspiracy theory. People with a built-in indifference to history are ill accustomed to retrospective digging, to lifting up rugs, to searching for subterranean forces and tendencies. Exploring the labyrinth of history is alien to the American soul, perhaps because an optimistic people find knowledge of the past too burdensome in the present. This is one reason why Korea has become a “forgotten war.”

When Stone went from one publisher to another in 1951, he found warm praise for the quality of his work and off-the-record comments that it was “too hot to handle”—an interesting example of a common, tacit self-censorship that coexists with wide freedom of speech. He put the book aside, until a chance meeting with Leo Huberman and Paul Sweezy in New York’s Central Park led to its original publication.

When I first came upon Hidden History as a graduate student, during the Vietnam War, a professor warned me against the book, saying it was unreliable and indulged in conspiracy theories. So I read it all the more eagerly, and found that, indeed, Stone’s method was in contrast to that of highly recommended scholars: he cared about truth, he was fearless, he didn’t equate objectivity with silence on the great issues of his day. It seemed that I. F. Stone provided a model of honest inquiry, of which there are all too few examples—particularly in regard to our recent Asian wars. Hidden History is above all a truthful book, and it remains one of the best accounts of the American role in the Korean War.

Mary McCarthy once slandered Lillian Hellman by saying everything she said was a lie—down to the last “a, an, and the.” We may reverse that with Stone, and say everything he says is the truth (as he sees it)—to the last “a, an, and the.” But what is his model, his teaching? It seemed to a graduate student that the task of honest inquiry into the contemporary history and politics of America was a relatively straightforward matter, following Stone, of subjecting the available literature—newspapers, books, official documents—to a careful, critical reading. (Among its many virtues, Hidden History is a textbook on how to read.)

Instead one discovers that his method is difficult. Not that close reading is necessarily hard; no, there is something else that is hard: to disabuse oneself of received wisdom is hard, as it bombards you in various forms; to find and ask unasked questions is hard; to confront authority is hard. The hardest thing is to tell the truth, because desire hinders perception and quashes memory.

For example, our desire to love our nation and love justice: Harry Truman was a good and honest man; Stone’s sympathetic portrait of him (“as honorable and decent a specimen of that excellent breed, the plain small-town American, as one could find anywhere in the U.S.A.”) is right; how could Harry Truman have allowed the provocation of a war by the Republican right (something Stone hints at), or the terror-bombing of a defenseless people, or taken us to the brink of World War III? We have an often unintuited desire to trust our leaders: since they hold high position, ergo they must deserve it (even when their names are Joseph McCarthy or Curtis LeMay).

This is part of what makes critical reading difficult and makes remembering even harder: a faculty of repression, honed by our desire to live at peace with our liberal system and our American brethren, wins out. Indeed, a remarkable aspect of contemporary America is its ineffable capacity to forget those secrets that do happen to penetrate the media, salient facts that surface but quickly drift to the briny deep, owing to an absence of context or the absence of a political sensibility that likes to seek out patterns in the events of the day. Freedom of speech and a fairly extensive disclosure of foreign policy secrets obtain in the United States, but one sometimes wonders if anyone is listening or, if listening, remembering.

Stone’s discoveries about the gaps, distortions, and outright lies in the official record should not surprise a person familiar with, say, the American record in Vietnam, beginning with the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem and the Tonkin Gulf incident in 1964, the latter used to gain Congressional backing for the war. In the 1970s the Watergate episode and a spate of revelations about the CIA were merely prelude to the truly Byzantine covert activities during the Reagan years—ranging from the Contra war in Nicaragua to the Oliver North/William Casey dealings with shady Iranian arms merchants to the unmasking of General Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama as a major drug-runner, who just happened to have been on the CIA payroll for many years. But somehow such events are not connected to form a pattern, and remain episodic outrages that come and go inexplicably.

Let us take an example from Stone’s book, apparently a small one. A soybean conspiracy occurred just before the Korean War began, according to Stone—but also according to Dean Acheson. During the MacArthur hearings in 1951, a Senator asked Acheson if he had heard anything about a corner on the soybean market in June 1950. Acheson replied blandly, “there was, I recall, a very serious situation created by a group of Chinese buying and taking delivery of a certain amount of soybeans, which gave certain controls over prices.” However, Acheson did not quite recall who might have been involved, could not really say if perhaps the China Lobby had something to do with it, and so the Senators went on to a new line of questioning. Since we are not supposed to think about conspiracies, no one but Stone followed this story up.2

Someone had dumped large amounts of soybeans on the Chicago market to force the price down, while holding bigger amounts in soybean futures. The speculation began in mid-June and was targeted specifically for big selloffs at the end of the week before that fateful Sunday, June 25, 1950. The Commodity Exchange Authority later said that by June 30, fifty-six Chinese held nearly half of all open contracts for July soybean futures—all “on the long side,” meaning they were playing for a rise in price (p. 352).

Although it still seems impossible to get the full list of names behind this scam, I. F. Stone at the time correctly named T. L. Soong, brother of fabulously wealthy T. V. Soong, and brother-in-law of Chiang Kai-shek.3 Furthermore, according to several sources, Senator Joe McCarthy profited from the soybean corner. Drew Pearson wrote in his diary, “McCarthy was buying soybeans” at the time when “the Chinese Nationalists did just about corner the market before Korea”;4 Stone said McCarthy had “a successful flier in soybeans” later on in 1950 (p. 349).

Soybean speculation was one of the many errant counterpoints to Washington’s official story that Stone homed in on; although it seemed like a minor business, it is a neglected thread in unraveling how this war began.5 In any case it is a fine example of a key element in Stone’s method—to find what he called the “one very queer detail,” the “one odd-shaped piece that doesn’t fit,” and thus demolish the official logic or construct an alternative logic. It is doubtful that anyone has ever been better at this.

Another odd-shaped piece of evidence was the original cable from the American embassy in Seoul announcing the North Korean assault—basing its account on South Korean Army information, which had been “partly confirmed” by American sources. Stone asks, “What part of the South Korean version was confirmed? What part was not confirmed?” He then digs up a reference in the London Times to brief dispatches from the British Mission in Seoul, merely confirming “the outbreak of fighting.” This thin reed of partially confirmed information then became the basis for the United Nations decision to involve itself in the Korean conflict.

Stone reads a document the way Sherlock Holmes looks for fingerprints. Readers interested in a lesson in this ferreting out of half-truth and distortion might simply turn to a “ragout of intelligence information” from MacArthur’s headquarters about Chinese intervention in the war (pp. 170-173), which Stone surgically dissects until nothing is left. It is one example among many in the book. What is more remarkable, though, is the humor that Stone sustains in the midst of his awful tale.

His description of the phantomlike ephemerality of the Korean People’s Army in Tokyo’s briefings, for example, is done brilliantly, accurately, and with a satirist’s wit. An army that MacArthur claimed to have utterly destroyed after the Inch’on landing two months later was raised “like Lazarus, from the tomb.” By Christmas 1950, according to MacArthur’s headquarters, “eleven reconstituted North Korean divisions [had] reappeared in the last twelve days”; “Kim Il Sung,” Stone wrote, “was made to seem a modern Cadmus.” And then there was MacArthur’s rapid retreat, ostensibly in the face of hordes of Chinese; Stone found this whole business odd, writing that “the Chinese had “failed to ‘agress,’” and declassified intelligence now backs him up: at this point the Chinese forces were not terribly large and for long periods there was little contact with the enemy, leading to what British intelligence sources called a “phony war.”

In many other episodes as well, declassified documentation backs up Stone’s judgment—which he based mostly on careful and wide reading of newspapers. The People’s Army was not destroyed in MacArthur’s Inch’on landing trap, but instead regrouped, first for guerrilla war in the central, mountainous regions of Korea and then for a combined Sino-Korean assault against MacArthur’s march to the Yalu, in which Korean forces were as important as the Chinese.

Stone was right that the State Department had long planned to take a serious outbreak of fighting in Korea to the United Nations and had drafted skeletal memoranda for such an eventuality. John Foster Dulles’s own memoranda now show that Stone was exactly on the money in saying that after Dulles joined the Truman administration in April 1950, he “discreetly but unmistakably joined forces with MacArthur on Formosa policy.” He was right that China had good defensive strategic reasons for entering the Korean conflict, as a RAND Corporation study subsequently concluded.

He was right about Soviet caution and restraint after the war began, and about Stalin’s swallowing one affront after another (such as our planes bombing an airbase near Vladivostok). Khrushchev’s memoirs essentially reiterate Stone’s point that “the self-restraint of China and Russia” at the Pusan perimeter “made possible an American victory.” That is, Stalin (and Mao), fearing the consequences of an American rout, refused to give Kim Il Sung the requisite tanks, planes, and heavy artillery needed to win in the crucial fighting near Taegu and Pusan in August and September 1950. We now know that Acheson had vowed to come back in if American forces were pushed off the peninsula, and the Navy had the massive amphibious power to do it, as demonstrated at Inch’on. Stone was right that MacArthur and his intelligence chief, the odd and duplicitous General Charles Willoughby, contrived both fighting strategy and official reports on the fighting to serve their goal of extending the war to China.6

On the larger question of historical responsibility for the disastrous attempt at rolling back communism in North Korea (the operative document, NSC81, called for a “roll-back”), Stone declined to absolve Truman and Acheson and simply blame MacArthur—the easy and comfortable position and something that an entire literature of liberal apologetics has since sought to maintain. “Truman either had to risk the ending of the cold war or its possible transformation into the real thing,” Stone wrote; in the event, Truman “gave MacArthur the signal to go ahead.”

Stone’s portrait of the leading diplomatic light of the period, Dean Acheson (whom James Chace recently called “the greatest Secretary of State since John Quincy Adams”), is unsurpassed in the literature. If Acheson was to our British allies precisely “their picture of what a foreign secretary should be: cultivated, personable, and superbly tailored,” he was to many Americans a subversive poseur: “Nothing could be more dangerous to a public figure in America than the mere suspicion of an urbane and compassionate view of history and humanity,” Stone wrote, something amply confirmed by Acheson’s principled defense of his old friend, Alger Hiss, and the subsequent McCarthyite outrage.

Stone then went on to say, however (p. 204):

Only in the heat-distorted vision of cold-war America could Acheson be seen other than as he was: an “enlightened conservative”—to use a barbarous and patronizing phrase.… Who remembered in these days of McCarthyism that Acheson, on making his Washington debut at the Treasury before the war, had been denounced by New Dealers as a “Morgan man,” a Wall Street Trojan Horse, a borer-from-within on behalf of the big bankers?

It is now fashionable to point to Acheson as a wise strategist who, but for McCarthy and MacArthur, would have realized a mutually beneficial relationship with China, a quarter century before Richard Nixon picked the policy out of the dustbin of history. But Stone was far better when he said (pp. 203–204):

What a public man “really” thinks is difficult to discover and rarely of much relevance when found. It is what the pressure of circumstance upon his own personality leads him to do and say that counts. What Acheson had long said and done committed him to a policy hostile to Communist China.… Acheson could not let himself be objective about the Communist revolution in China—and remain Secretary of State.

Stone also accurately dated Acheson’s about-face on China from February 1950, with the onset of his “total diplomacy” speeches, designed to prepare the public for the major reorientation of American Cold War policy embodied in National Security Document 68. “The drift to the worst of policies in the absence of the vision and courage necessary for the best,” Stone wrote, “was marked by a series of speeches in which Acheson began to set forth a new image of the Chinese revolution, hardly recognizable to a reader of the White Paper” (the State Department’s 1949 analysis of the victory of the Chinese revolution).

It is important today to remind Americans of what was done in their name in the 1950s, but in a different era it is also easy to do so. In 1952 it took rare courage for Stone to write, after reading an Air Force briefing of the obliteration with “jellied gasoline bombs” of a North Korean city (p. 179):

There is an indifference to human suffering to be read between those lines which makes me as an American deeply ashamed of what was done that day.… The mass bombing raid on Sinuiju November 8 was the beginning of a race between peace and provocation. A terrible retribution threatened the peoples of the Western world who so feebly permitted such acts to be done in their name. For it was by such means that the pyromaniacs hoped to set the world afire.

Stone was one of the few to write with compassion about the horrible consequences of this war for the Korean people. To think that the American Air Force could have dropped oceans of napalm and other incendiaries on cities and towns in North Korea,7 leaving a legacy of deep bitterness palpable four decades later, and that this was done in the name of a conflict now called “the forgotten war”—as memory confronts amnesia, we ask, who are the sane of this world?

The book also shows us that I. F. Stone loves a good mystery, that his excavating instincts reveal the soul of a good detective. Hidden History is good history, but it is also a tale well told—full of suspense, surprises, dangling questions, unexpected outcomes. It merges a fictional style with real people and events, and reads with the pace and structure of a good novel. The last chapter concludes the book as it began, on a note mingling tantalizing uncertainty with profound observation. Citing the “astute and sophisticated” lectures that George Kennan gave at the University of Chicago in 1951, he says Kennan’s remarks on the Spanish-American War (and its extension to the Philippines by Dewey’s attack on the Spanish fleet at Manila) may some day be equally appropriate for the Korean War (p. 345):

We can only say [Kennan declared], that it looks very much as though, in this case, the action of the United States government had been determined primarily on the basis of a very able and very quiet intrigue by a few strategically placed persons in Washington, an intrigue which received absolution, forgiveness and a sort of public blessing by virtue of war hysteria.

If Stone’s theses remain unproved on a possible provocation of the Korean War, or a tacit agreement to let the attack happen, no honest historian today can do anything other than withhold judgment on these dangling questions. There is no doubt that the North Koreans were ready to fight on the morning of June 25, 1950, but there are many remaining questions about South Korean provocations throughout the summer of 1949, now well documented, and Seoul’s relations with Chiang Kai-shek’s regime on Taiwan, which grew in importance in the spring of 1950.

Stone’s virtues are ones that do not come easily. He is a rare person, who can excavate our errors and calamities without developing a corrosive cynicism, who can mix love of country with the courage to confront the high and mighty (indeed, takes it as a duty), who possesses an idealism born of searching examination, not sappy homilies; a man with unflagging curiosity that feeds off an optimism and good humor with inexplicable roots. Behind it all one senses an indefatigable, irrepressible will to truth, to independence, to iconoclasm not for its own sake but for our sake. He has found a way to tell the truth and still remain a liberal, still keep his balance and his sense of humor—a remarkable accomplishment. The ideals of the enlightenment are embodied in this man, as he walks in a land that only half-believes them.

His open mind has much to do with his method, a Socratic questioning that is itself open-ended; this is also the secret of the longevity of Hidden History, with its many still-unanswered questions. In his seventies Stone embarked on a quest to learn Greek and master the philosophers of antiquity: more questions for a man who must know that closure of questions draws the curtain down on one’s creativity, and who also knows that beyond the good historian is the good citizen. As Nietzsche put it in a magnificent essay:

A historical phenomenon, known clearly and completely and resolved into a phenomenon of knowledge, is, for him who has perceived it, dead: for he has recognized in it the delusion, the injustice, the blind passion, and in general the whole earthly and darkening horizon of this phenomenon, and has thereby also understood its power in history. This power has now lost its hold over him insofar as he is a man of knowledge; but perhaps it has not done so insofar as he is a man involved in life.8

---

_Bruce Cumings is professor of East Asian history, University of Chicago, and the author of The Origins of the Korean War (two volumes, 1981–1989, Princeton University Press)._

1. The reference to Tacitus is from Franz Schurmann, The Logic of World Power: An Inquiry into the Origins, Currents, and Contradictions of World Politics (New York, Pantheon Books, 1974). This brilliant book takes a page from I. F. Stone’s method, although it is theoretically more sophisticated; like Hidden History, it quickly went out of print.

2. MacArthur Hearings, vol. 3, p. 2187; New York Times, June 9, 1951. The Times noted that the corner had “aroused official suspicion that they had advance knowledge of a war that caught this country wholly unprepared” (New York Times, July 6, 1951).

3. For declassified information backing up Stone, see Office of Chinese Affairs, box 4223, Anne B. Wheeler to A. G. Hope, July 25, 1950; Hope to Magill, Aug. 1, 1950.

4. Drew Pearson, Diaries, 1949–1959, Tyler Abell, ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1974), p. 250.

5. I cover this possibility at length in Origins of the Korean War, vol. 2 (Princeton University Press, 1989).

6. Readers interested in recent literature that, based on excellent declassified sources, backs up many of Stone’s observations should consult, among others, Rosemary Foot, The Wrong War (Cornell University Press, 1985); Peter Lowe, The Origins of the Korean War (White Plains, NY, Longman, 1986); Callum MacDonald, Korea: The War Before Vietnam (Glencoe: The Free Press, 1987).

7. In his oral history held at Princeton University, former Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay relates the following story, from the first days of the Korean War:

> We slipped a note kind of under the door into the Pentagon and said, “Look, let us go up there … and burn down five of the biggest towns in North Korea—and they’re not very big—and that ought to stop it.” Well, the answer to that was four or five screams—“You’ll kill a lot of non-combatants”—and “it’s too horrible.” Yet over a period of three years or so … we burned down every [sic] town in North Korea and South Korea, too.… Now, over a period of three years this is palatable, but to kill a few people to stop this from happening—a lot of people can’t stomach it.

8. Friedrich Nietzsche, “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Life,” in Untimely Meditations, trans. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 67.
